                        Preliminary Quick Start Manual for RFDISK
                        In Single Boot Mode Only.


For normal use run RFDISK as follows:

RFDISK W

If it crashes use:

RFDISK -# W

where # is the number of Hard Drives present.

It will display the computed drive geometry and then the Partitions found on
each drive.


Type is the Hexadecimal Partition Type

5 = Extended CHS Partition (Use for DOS 6, do not use above 8GB)
6 = FAT16 CHS (Do not use for Primary Partition ending above 8GB)
B = FAT32 CHS (Do not use for Primary Partition ending above 8GB)
C = FAT32 LBA (required for Primary Partitions above 8GB)
E = FAT16 LBA (Use for DOS 7+, required for Primary Partitions above 8GB)
F = Extended Partition (Use for DOS 7+, required above 8GB)

Start is the beginning Cylinder Number (Approx 8MB each for 255/63 Geometry)
End is the Cylinder Number of the next Partition

Ref identifies a boot profile which is only used in multiboot mode.
In single boot mode it is shown as "-".

These terms apply to the display as well as all commands.

Changes are not written until the "W" command is issued.

Partitions with Valid Boot Records are marked VALID.
Partitions with Invalid, non-blank Boot Records are marked INV and will have
their boot records erased upon commit unless overidden.



Type in:

D #

to select drive #
No # will return to overview mode.

Any changes will be lost if you change drive number, or quit, without
committing the changes first using the "W" command



To add a Partition Type:

A Type Start End [+]

Partitions created within an Extended Partition will become logical
Partitions.

The optinal "+" Places the Partition on Head 1 instead of 0.
This is done automatically for Partitions starting at 0 and for logical
Partitions.


To remove Partition Type:

R Type Start

Where Type and Start are as shown in the display. The "+" is not needed.
Removing an Extended Partition will remove the Logical Partitions within.


To install a Master Boot Record Type:

M


To make a Partition Active or Inactive Type:

T Type Start

This will toggle the Active Partition Flag on the Partition.


To erase the formatting of a Partition Type:

E Type Start

If the display says a Partition is Invalid, it will be erased automatically.
This command toggles the erase flag for the Partition.


To change the type and/or end of an existing Partition Type:

C Type Start NewType [NewEnd]

This will not alter the data. If the Partition is already Formatted, it will
be marked Invalid and erased when the changes are committed.


To delete all Partitions Type:

K


To commit all changes to a Drive Type:

W

If a Partition is marked Invalid (INV), it will be erased. If you do not want
the Partition header erased, use the E command above to toggle off the erase
flag.
After the changes are committed, the program will return to the full display
mode. You will have to reselect a drive to edit.


To quit without committing any further changes Type:

Q



The "?" command shows a summary of all commands available in the mode you are
currently in. Most commands require that you specify a Drive using the D
command.

Only the first character of the Command needs to be typed.


In single boot mode, References are defaulted to "-" and need not be
specified. Active Partitions will have a "-" displayed in the Act= field.


